Use Cases
===

In this section we explore various use cases for the Fuel [v1](../Future%20Roadmap/Planned%20Features.md#fuelv1) optimistic rollup. All the use cases covered below are examined in more detail in the [Tools and Applications](../4.%20Tools%20and%20Applications/0.%20Fast%20Withdrawals.md) section.

Transfers
---

Fuel can be used for high-performance, low-latency global transfers with any ERC-20 token or Ether.

**This is ideal for:**
- Global payment settlement
- Application-specific tokens
- Virtual gaming tokens and rewards
- Any situations where users are transferring ERC-20 tokens

Please see our interactive [🕹️ Fuel Plays Pokémon demo](https://fuelplayspokemon.com) for a live example of transfers in action.

Non-Custodial Exchange
---

Fuel's unique **multi-user transactions and HTLC support** are a perfect foundation for non-custodial exchanges.

**We support two kinds of exchange:**
- Multi-signature Swaps
- Cross-chain atomic swap with HTLCs

For further reading, please see [Non-Custodial Exchanges](../4.%20Tools%20and%20Applications/3.%20Non-Custodial%20Exchanges.md).

Mass-Token Dispersal
---

Fuel supports multi-input, multi-output transactions, making it perfect for pre-signed mass token dispersal scenarios where a single account must disperse tokens to a large number of unique recipients cost-efficiently.

This is possible on Fuel with a Merkleized dispersal pattern and our deterministic transaction identifiers, allowing dispersal transactions to be pre-signed and distributed off-chain. Tokens are only actually dispersed when claimed, greatly reducing overhead costs for unclaimed tokens.

For further reading on how we accomplish this for near-zero cost, please see [Token Minting](../4.%20Tools%20and%20Applications/1.%20Token%20Minting.md)

Fast Withdrawals
---

Fuel allows for fast (~10 minute) withdrawals using our unique HTLC output. Liquidity providers on the intended exit chain (e.g. Ethereum or Bitcoin) can allow users on Fuel to withdraw with minimal effort and at low-cost.

For further reading, please see [Fast Withdrawals](../4.%20Tools%20and%20Applications/0.%20Fast%20Withdrawals.md).

Subscriptions
---

Fuel's pre-signed transaction format is ideal for creating regular financial subscriptions, where a user can *sign up* to a subscription, pre-signing a set of transactions, and then allowing any service or system to collect payment on a regular basis non-interactively.

This is allows for cheap, care-free subscriptions for magazines, blogs, forums, and more.

For further reading, please see [Subscriptions](../4.%20Tools%20and%20Applications/2.%20Subscriptions.md).

Burning
---

Fuel has a "return data" transaction output, which can be used to store arbitrary data in Fuel such as: burn metadata, social media messages, timestamped hashes, or specific application data.

The burning of a token by sending it to the zero address can be associated with a specific event using the return data output, all within in the same transaction.
