Fuel Overview
===

This section of the docs goes over the fundamental technical details of the Fuel rollup chain: what it is, how it works, and why it is scalable and secure.

Background
---

Fuel is an _optimistic rollup_, a special sidechain architecture that is both trust-minimized and permissionless. Unlike a [traditional sidechain](https://blockstream.com/sidechains.pdf), where the safety of user funds is dependent on the honest majority of some set of validators that is disjoint from the main chain's miners, optimistic rollups borrow security directly from the main chain (Ethereum).

The simplified version of [optimistic rollups](https://ethresear.ch/t/minimal-viable-merged-consensus/5617) is as follows. Anyone may construct a rollup block off-chain and [submit it to Ethereum as _calldata_](https://vitalik.ca/general/2019/08/28/hybrid_layer_2.html) (i.e. simple binary data attached to a transaction). Each block submitted in this manner must build upon the previous rollup block (a contract keeps track of block header hashes for the rollup chain) and include a parametrizable bond. If a block is invalid, a [compact fraud proof](https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.09044) can be submitted and processed on-chain by anyone, which will roll back the rollup chain to the previous block, burn a portion of the bond, and reward the fraud prover with the rest. After a parametrizable timeout, rollup blocks are _finalized_, and are considered valid (i.e. can no longer be proven fraudulent) and their bond unlocked. Withdrawals are initiated by burning coins on the rollup, then completing the withdrawal after that rollup block has finalized.

Architecture: A High-Level View
---

Fuel is unique among Ethereum rollups in that it uses a [UTXO](https://github.com/bitcoinbook/bitcoinbook/blob/develop/ch06.asciidoc#transaction-outputs-and-inputs)-based transaction system. This allows for parallel transaction validation, and in the future stateless predicate validation for spending conditions, greatly increasing scalability compared to contemporary accounts-based blockchains and rollups.

Each transaction can spend [up to eight inputs and produce up to eight outputs](./trans). This allows atomic multi-user transactions, e.g. for an on-chain atomic exchange, which also means that non-custodial exchanges [can be built on top of Fuel](./../../4.%20Tools%20and%20Applications/3.%20Non-Custodial%20Exchanges.md). The deterministic and stateless nature of computing state element (UTXO) IDs produced and consumed by transactions enables long chains and [even trees of pre-signed transactions](../../4.%20Tools%20and%20Applications/1.%20Token%20Minting.md) to be constructed.

State elements (UTXOs and deposits) can be [_colored_](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Colored_Coins), i.e. represent different assets. This allows transactions to natively handle both ETH and any ERC-20 token.

Fuel supports a number of spending conditions that allow for powerful implicit expressivity:
- [HTLC outputs](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Hash_Time_Locked_Contracts), which have both a hashlock and a timelock. These enable cross-chain atomic swaps (including between Fuel and Ethereum for [instant withdrawals](./../../4.%20Tools%20and%20Applications/0.%20Fast%20Withdrawals.md)). They can also be used as a signaling mechanism (e.g. to vote in a DAO), and when combined with a chain of pre-signed transactions, for cancellable subscriptions.
- [Return outputs](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/OP_RETURN), which are unspendable and can include a long binary blob. These can be used to build applications that are executed client-side and use Fuel for timestamping messages cheaply.

The fraud proof scheme used by Fuel is unique in that [it does not require state serialization](https://ethresear.ch/t/compact-fraud-proofs-for-utxo-chains-without-intermediate-state-serialization/5885) (computing the Merkle root of the state) after every transaction, or even after every block. State serialization is one of the biggest bottlenecks for Ethereum and accounts-based rollups today, and remains a Herculean challenge to optimize implementations around. This, along with parallelizable transaction validation, make Fuel the most scalable rollup in the world.

Fuel's block production model is entirely permissionless, and requires no token (and will never require a token). Anyone may start by submitting a [_root_](./../1.%20Data%20Structures/Roots.md), a bundle of Fuel transactions, to Ethereum. The root can then be included in a [Fuel block](../1.%20Data%20Structures/Blocks.md) by anyone, with a small caveat. The Fuel operator has a short period of time (on the order of minutes, a parameter) where they are the only one that can use this root in a block. This allows the operator to reliably provide a soft confirmation to a recipient that a transaction will be included in the next Fuel block. While this is the default and preferred configuration, using an operator is a system parameter that can be disabled trivially on contract creation if soft confirmations aren't needed.

What To Read Next
---

For a detailed analysis of Fuel's security guarantees, and how it compares to other scaling technologies, see [the next page](2.%20Security%20Analysis.md). (_Warning: this document assumes a high level of technical proficiency._)

A more in-depth survey of Fuel's components is given [here](6.%20System%20Description%20Primer.md), with [block](3.%20Block%20Architecture.md) and [transaction](4.%20Transaction%20Architecture.md) architecture descriptions also available.

The canonical serialization scheme is defined [here](5.%20Serialization.md).

Finally, the parameters used for deployments across different networks is found [here](7.%20Deployment%20Parameters.md).
