Deployment Parameters
===

Construction
---

Here we will describe the Fuel contract's constructor parameters.

- **operator** : `address`; The primary operator of the Fuel rollup. This account receives priority access on including roots in blocks production, however, anyone else may use roots with a delay specified by the `submissionDelay` parameter.
- **finalizationDelay** : `uint256`; The time to finalization in Ethereum blocks.
- **submissionDelay** : `uint256`; The number of Ethereum blocks a non-operator must wait before using a root in a block.
- **penaltyDelay** : `uint256`; The delay which the operator will face if they commit Fraud, until the time they may come back online as the primary operator.
- **bondSize** : `uint256`; The Ether bondSize requirement for block production specified in wei.
- **name** : `string`; The name string used for contract identification and in our EIP712 signing schema.
- **version** : `string`; The version of the contract used for identification and in our EIP712 signing schema.
- **chainId** : `uint256`; The Etheruem network chain identifier used for identification and replay attack protection in our EIP712 signing schema.
- **genesis** : `bytes32`; The registered genesis block hash. This property is simply vanity and can be set to any value as the minimum value reference block is always > 0.

### Deploying in Operated Mode
If you would like to deploy a Fuel chain in operated mode, use non-zero values for `operator` and `submissionDelay`.

### Deploying in Un-operated Mode
If you would like to run Fuel in an unoperated mode, whereby anyone may submit blocks at anytime, you can simply omit the `operator` by setting it to the null or unused address and the `submissionDelay` at zero.

This will allow a more decentralized operation of the chain contract, however users will lose operator guarantees like instant zero-confirmation transactions.

Finalization Delays
---
In any optimistic rollup, one has to consider what finalization time is right for them. The longer this value is set the more security you can offer users.

Setting this value too long may interrupt normal withdrawal practise for other users such as liquidity providers.

We generally recommend 1 week on the minimum or 2 weeks on the higher end to ensure protection against chain-congestion attacks.
